build_tools/sbt.md, before:

---
layout: section
order: 2
title: SBT
---

- TOC
{:toc}

This [sbt](http://github.com/sbt/sbt) plugin generates a `.ensime` file and provides various convenience commands for interacting with [ENSIME](http://github.com/ensime/ensime-server).

## Install

Add these lines to `~/.sbt/0.13/plugins/plugins.sbt` as opposed to `project/plugins.sbt` (the decision to use ENSIME is per-user, rather than per-project):

```scala
addSbtPlugin("org.ensime" % "sbt-ensime" % "1.12.4")
```

**Check that again**, if you incorrectly used `~/.sbt/0.13/plugins.sbt` you'll get an sbt resolution error, it really has to be in the `plugins` folder.

**One more check** we've undergone a few artefact name changes - make sure you copied the full line.

If you are following the developer version of ENSIME, add this to your `~/.sbt/0.13/global.sbt`

```scala
import org.ensime.EnsimeCoursierKeys._
ensimeServerVersion in ThisBuild := "2.0.0-SNAPSHOT"
```

Create the `.ensime` file for you project, start `sbt` (in the terminal or your editor's `sbt` mode) and run the `ensimeConfig` command.

## Learn to use SBT

If you've come from an IDE you might not be aware of the power of `sbt`. Please take the time to read the [sbt Getting Started Guide](http://www.scala-sbt.org/0.13/docs/Getting-Started.html) before proceeding and appreciate that `sbt` is responsible for building your project, not ENSIME.

## Core Commands

The core `sbt-ensime` plugin allows you to generate `.ensime` files:

* `ensimeConfig` --- Generate a `.ensime` for the project (takes space-separated parameters to restrict to subprojects).
* `ensimeConfigProject` --- Generate a `project/.ensime` for the project definition.

Note that downloading and resolving the sources and javadocs can take some time on first use, so we recommend that you use [coursier](http://get-coursier.io).

## Extra Tasks and Commands

Also bundled are extra workflow tasks, which are used by ENSIME clients:

| `ensimeRunMain`              | Alternative to `runMain` allowing environment variables and jvm arguments to be used, e.g. `a/ensimeRunMain FOO=BAR -Xmx2g foo.Bar baz`. |
| `c/ensimeLaunch MyApp`       | A launch manager that lets you define canned `ensimeRunMain` applications (analogous to IntelliJ's "Run Configurations"---[see below](#launch-configurations)). |
| `b/ensimeCompileOnly`        | Compile a single fully-qualified `.scala` file using `b`'s classpath. Takes custom flags, e.g. `scalacOptions in (Test, ensimeCompileOnly) ++= Seq("-Xshow-phases")`. |
| `b/ensimeScalariformOnly`    | Format a single fully-qualified `.scala` file using `b`'s Scalariform settings (compatible with, but does not require, `sbt-scalariform`). |
| `ensimeRunDebug`             | Like `ensimeRunMain` but adds debugging flags automatically. |
| `debugging` / `debuggingOff` | Mutates the default `javaOptions` to include debugging flags ([see below](#debugging-example)). |
{: .sbt-tasks}


### Launch Configurations

To define presets for the `ensimeLaunch` command, use the `LaunchConfig` and `JavaArgs` case classes provided by sbt-ensime, assigning a sequence to the `ensimeLaunchConfigurations` setting for a project:

```scala
ensimeLaunchConfigurations := Seq(
  LaunchConfig("server",
    JavaArgs(
      mainClass = "mypackage.Server",
      classArgs = Seq("start", "--foreground"),
      envArgs   = Map("MYSERVER_PORT" -> "8080"),
      jvmArgs   = Seq("-Xmx2g")
    )
  )
)
```

Invoking `ensimeLaunch server` will then execute the given class with the specified arguments and environment.

An untracked `ensime.sbt` file is [advised](#customise) for this, assuming you have installed sbt-ensime as a global plugin as recommended.

### Debugging Example

Debugging an application is the easiest:

```
> ensimeRunDebug foo.Bar
```

but debugging tests are trickier.

If you do not `fork` your tests from `sbt` you may be able to attach a remote debugger to the entire session by starting like `sbt -jvm-debug 1337` (check the docs of your `sbt` script). However, if you have `fork in Test := true` then you can use our `debugging` task to mutate the java options to include the necessary flags:

```
crossbuild ~/Projects/ensime-server sbt
> debugging
[warn] Enabling debugging for all forked processes
[info] Only one JVM can use the port and it will await a connection before proceeding.
> jerk/test-only *JerkFormatsSpec
Listening for transport dt_socket at address: 5005
```

at which point, the test will hang until you connect a remote debugger to port 5005. When you are finished debugging, cancel the test or let it run to completion, and then type `debuggingOff`.

## Customise

For project-specific tailorings, you do not need to commit anything to your project. Simply create an `ensime.sbt` in your project's base directory (beside `build.sbt`). Don't forget to add it to your `~/.gitignore`.

Think long and hard before adding any of these settings to your global `~/.sbt/0.13/global.sbt`. For example, if you were to set a global `ensimeScalaVersion`, it will break if you are working on sbt plugins, old projects or upgrade to the latest scala. When putting settings in your global configuration, you must `import org.ensime.EnsimeKeys._`

Here is an example that sets a specific memory size for the ensime server:

```scala
ensimeJavaFlags in ThisBuild := Seq("-Xss2m", "-Xmx2g", "-XX:MaxMetaspaceSize=512m")
```

another, to use ENSIME on a Java 6 or 7 project (the server needs JDK 8). This is reasonably safe in your `~/.sbt/0.13/global.sbt`:

```scala
ensimeJavaHome in ThisBuild := file("/usr/lib/jvm/java-8-openjdk")
```

another, to use the assembly jar which you build locally:

```scala
ensimeServerJars in ThisBuild := List(file("../ensime_2.11-2.0.0-SNAPSHOT-assembly.jar"))
ensimeServerProjectJars in ThisBuild := List(file("../ensime_2.10-2.0.0-SNAPSHOT-assembly.jar"))
```

another, for Android projects:

```scala
ensimeJavacOptions ++= (javacOptions in (core, Compile)).value,
ensimeScalacOptions ++= (scalacOptions in (core, Compile)).value
```

## Troubleshooting

Always check the [tickets flagged as FAQ](https://github.com/ensime/ensime-sbt/issues?q=label%3AFAQ) before reporting a new issue.

Tickets are extremely hard to reproduce unless you create a minimal example project and share with us the steps to reproduce the problem.

Bug reports in the form of a pull request into the `src/sbt-test/ensime-sbt` directory are well received, which is our suite of integration tests using the [sbt scripted](http://eed3si9n.com/testing-sbt-plugins) framework (its very simple to use). Pull requests with tests and fixes are living the dream.

You can follow snapshot releases by using the following instead of the stable release

```scala
// or clone this repo and type `sbt publishLocal`
resolvers += Resolver.sonatypeRepo("snapshots")

// update to the latest development version, see project/EnsimeSbtBuild.scala
addSbtPlugin("org.ensime" % "sbt-ensime" % "<WHATEVER IS LATEST>")
```

### Cancel Processes

By default, `sbt` will not cancel a running subprocess if you type `C-c`. You are recommended to add the following to your `~/.sbt/0.13/global.sbt` so that it will do so:

```scala
cancelable in Global := true
```

Emacs users should recall that in order to send a control sequence to the `sbt-mode` subprocess, first run `sbt-clear` (bound to `C-c C-v` by default) then `C-c`. i.e. to send `C-c` to `sbt`, type `C-c C-v C-c C-c` (you probably want to bind this to something easier).


### SBT Version

Your `project/build.properties` needs to use a version newer than 0.13.5 of sbt due to a [breaking AutoPlugin change](https://github.com/ensime/ensime-server/issues/672), e.g.

```
sbt.version=0.13.12
```


## Contributing

You can check what runs in the CI by investigating the `.drone.yml`, `appveyor.yml` and `.travis.yml` files. These should give you a good feel for what to run locally.

When submitting a PR, we expect an accompanying test in the `sbt-test` folder. These use the [sbt scripted](http://eed3si9n.com/testing-sbt-plugins) plugin and you can start by copying one of the existing tests (use symbolic links instead of copying files).

To try your build locally, use `sbt publishLocal` (which will also happen as part of running `sbt scripted`) and make your required `sbt-ensime` version match that of the snapshot you are building. Remember to nuke your `~/.ivy2/local` once the fix is merged and published upstream.

Feel free to ask questions on the github issue tracker or [gitter.im/ensime/ensime-server](https://gitter.im/ensime/ensime-server) (there is no dedicated chat room for `sbt-ensime`).

Commit message:

clarify support differences
Prior to this change it seemed like github or gitter were both ok for asking questions. This will hopefully help folks use gitter for support and github for actual bugs.

build_tools/sbt.md, after:

---
layout: section
order: 2
title: SBT
---

- TOC
{:toc}

This [sbt](http://github.com/sbt/sbt) plugin generates a `.ensime` file and provides various convenience commands for interacting with [ENSIME](http://github.com/ensime/ensime-server).

## Install

Add these lines to `~/.sbt/0.13/plugins/plugins.sbt` as opposed to `project/plugins.sbt` (the decision to use ENSIME is per-user, rather than per-project):

```scala
addSbtPlugin("org.ensime" % "sbt-ensime" % "1.12.4")
```

**Check that again**, if you incorrectly used `~/.sbt/0.13/plugins.sbt` you'll get an sbt resolution error, it really has to be in the `plugins` folder.

**One more check** we've undergone a few artefact name changes - make sure you copied the full line.

If you are following the developer version of ENSIME, add this to your `~/.sbt/0.13/global.sbt`

```scala
import org.ensime.EnsimeCoursierKeys._
ensimeServerVersion in ThisBuild := "2.0.0-SNAPSHOT"
```

Create the `.ensime` file for you project, start `sbt` (in the terminal or your editor's `sbt` mode) and run the `ensimeConfig` command.

## Learn to use SBT

If you've come from an IDE you might not be aware of the power of `sbt`. Please take the time to read the [sbt Getting Started Guide](http://www.scala-sbt.org/0.13/docs/Getting-Started.html) before proceeding and appreciate that `sbt` is responsible for building your project, not ENSIME.

## Core Commands

The core `sbt-ensime` plugin allows you to generate `.ensime` files:

* `ensimeConfig` --- Generate a `.ensime` for the project (takes space-separated parameters to restrict to subprojects).
* `ensimeConfigProject` --- Generate a `project/.ensime` for the project definition.

Note that downloading and resolving the sources and javadocs can take some time on first use, so we recommend that you use [coursier](http://get-coursier.io).

## Extra Tasks and Commands

Also bundled are extra workflow tasks, which are used by ENSIME clients:

| `ensimeRunMain`              | Alternative to `runMain` allowing environment variables and jvm arguments to be used, e.g. `a/ensimeRunMain FOO=BAR -Xmx2g foo.Bar baz`. |
| `c/ensimeLaunch MyApp`       | A launch manager that lets you define canned `ensimeRunMain` applications (analogous to IntelliJ's "Run Configurations"---[see below](#launch-configurations)). |
| `b/ensimeCompileOnly`        | Compile a single fully-qualified `.scala` file using `b`'s classpath. Takes custom flags, e.g. `scalacOptions in (Test, ensimeCompileOnly) ++= Seq("-Xshow-phases")`. |
| `b/ensimeScalariformOnly`    | Format a single fully-qualified `.scala` file using `b`'s Scalariform settings (compatible with, but does not require, `sbt-scalariform`). |
| `ensimeRunDebug`             | Like `ensimeRunMain` but adds debugging flags automatically. |
| `debugging` / `debuggingOff` | Mutates the default `javaOptions` to include debugging flags ([see below](#debugging-example)). |
{: .sbt-tasks}


### Launch Configurations

To define presets for the `ensimeLaunch` command, use the `LaunchConfig` and `JavaArgs` case classes provided by sbt-ensime, assigning a sequence to the `ensimeLaunchConfigurations` setting for a project:

```scala
ensimeLaunchConfigurations := Seq(
  LaunchConfig("server",
    JavaArgs(
      mainClass = "mypackage.Server",
      classArgs = Seq("start", "--foreground"),
      envArgs   = Map("MYSERVER_PORT" -> "8080"),
      jvmArgs   = Seq("-Xmx2g")
    )
  )
)
```

Invoking `ensimeLaunch server` will then execute the given class with the specified arguments and environment.

An untracked `ensime.sbt` file is [advised](#customise) for this, assuming you have installed sbt-ensime as a global plugin as recommended.

### Debugging Example

Debugging an application is the easiest:

```
> ensimeRunDebug foo.Bar
```

but debugging tests are trickier.

If you do not `fork` your tests from `sbt` you may be able to attach a remote debugger to the entire session by starting like `sbt -jvm-debug 1337` (check the docs of your `sbt` script). However, if you have `fork in Test := true` then you can use our `debugging` task to mutate the java options to include the necessary flags:

```
crossbuild ~/Projects/ensime-server sbt
> debugging
[warn] Enabling debugging for all forked processes
[info] Only one JVM can use the port and it will await a connection before proceeding.
> jerk/test-only *JerkFormatsSpec
Listening for transport dt_socket at address: 5005
```

at which point, the test will hang until you connect a remote debugger to port 5005. When you are finished debugging, cancel the test or let it run to completion, and then type `debuggingOff`.

## Customise

For project-specific tailorings, you do not need to commit anything to your project. Simply create an `ensime.sbt` in your project's base directory (beside `build.sbt`). Don't forget to add it to your `~/.gitignore`.

Think long and hard before adding any of these settings to your global `~/.sbt/0.13/global.sbt`. For example, if you were to set a global `ensimeScalaVersion`, it will break if you are working on sbt plugins, old projects or upgrade to the latest scala. When putting settings in your global configuration, you must `import org.ensime.EnsimeKeys._`

Here is an example that sets a specific memory size for the ensime server:

```scala
ensimeJavaFlags in ThisBuild := Seq("-Xss2m", "-Xmx2g", "-XX:MaxMetaspaceSize=512m")
```

another, to use ENSIME on a Java 6 or 7 project (the server needs JDK 8). This is reasonably safe in your `~/.sbt/0.13/global.sbt`:

```scala
ensimeJavaHome in ThisBuild := file("/usr/lib/jvm/java-8-openjdk")
```

another, to use the assembly jar which you build locally:

```scala
ensimeServerJars in ThisBuild := List(file("../ensime_2.11-2.0.0-SNAPSHOT-assembly.jar"))
ensimeServerProjectJars in ThisBuild := List(file("../ensime_2.10-2.0.0-SNAPSHOT-assembly.jar"))
```

another, for Android projects:

```scala
ensimeJavacOptions ++= (javacOptions in (core, Compile)).value,
ensimeScalacOptions ++= (scalacOptions in (core, Compile)).value
```

## Troubleshooting

Always check the [tickets flagged as FAQ](https://github.com/ensime/ensime-sbt/issues?q=label%3AFAQ) before reporting a new issue.

Tickets are extremely hard to reproduce unless you create a minimal example project and share with us the steps to reproduce the problem.

Bug reports in the form of a pull request into the `src/sbt-test/ensime-sbt` directory are well received, which is our suite of integration tests using the [sbt scripted](http://eed3si9n.com/testing-sbt-plugins) framework (its very simple to use). Pull requests with tests and fixes are living the dream.

You can follow snapshot releases by using the following instead of the stable release

```scala
// or clone this repo and type `sbt publishLocal`
resolvers += Resolver.sonatypeRepo("snapshots")

// update to the latest development version, see project/EnsimeSbtBuild.scala
addSbtPlugin("org.ensime" % "sbt-ensime" % "<WHATEVER IS LATEST>")
```

### Cancel Processes

By default, `sbt` will not cancel a running subprocess if you type `C-c`. You are recommended to add the following to your `~/.sbt/0.13/global.sbt` so that it will do so:

```scala
cancelable in Global := true
```

Emacs users should recall that in order to send a control sequence to the `sbt-mode` subprocess, first run `sbt-clear` (bound to `C-c C-v` by default) then `C-c`. i.e. to send `C-c` to `sbt`, type `C-c C-v C-c C-c` (you probably want to bind this to something easier).


### SBT Version

Your `project/build.properties` needs to use a version newer than 0.13.5 of sbt due to a [breaking AutoPlugin change](https://github.com/ensime/ensime-server/issues/672), e.g.

```
sbt.version=0.13.12
```


## Contributing

You can check what runs in the CI by investigating the `.drone.yml`, `appveyor.yml` and `.travis.yml` files. These should give you a good feel for what to run locally.

When submitting a PR, we expect an accompanying test in the `sbt-test` folder. These use the [sbt scripted](http://eed3si9n.com/testing-sbt-plugins) plugin and you can start by copying one of the existing tests (use symbolic links instead of copying files).

To try your build locally, use `sbt publishLocal` (which will also happen as part of running `sbt scripted`) and make your required `sbt-ensime` version match that of the snapshot you are building. Remember to nuke your `~/.ivy2/local` once the fix is merged and published upstream.

Feel free to ask support questions on [gitter.im/ensime/ensime-server](https://gitter.im/ensime/ensime-server) (there is no dedicated chat room for `sbt-ensime`) and to post reproducable bugs on the GitHub issue tracker.
